GraphQL and AppProto are what I sort of came
to find out what they were comparing two different front-end protocols
for the social web.
My background is I was a former social graph developer for eight
years.
I designed server-to-client APIs for web, cross-platform
APIs, working on native code Android and iOS.
I worked on efficiency and latency challenges, building social media UIs
and real-time data access to apps.
And I found this tooling so good, it was open source and
I used it in my own projects.
So naturally, the first time I came across ATProto, I
was like, wait, what is the difference between these two?
I just described everything that may be true of ATProto.
So GraphQL is an ubiquitous library, and you don't
have to take my word for it.
You just go to GraphQL.
org and see the number of large companies that are using it,
like Meta, AWS, GitHub.
In my world, GraphQL was so ubiquitous that it was
sort of obvious that at least someone out there would be trying
to make a comparison of the two technologies, given how you could
just pop open a web browser, a web dev console, and sort
of see the truth that most websites are using it.
One major social media website is not listed in that previous list,
maybe because their CEO doesn't understand how GraphQL works.
Let's not make that mistake today.
Let's find out.
So first, when I was looking at this problem, I was like,
all right, well, I'll search GraphQL and at Proto
Bridge.
Surely someone will have documented this.
And no, every single one of these results is someone not answering
that question or a mismatch.
The AI overview gives a description of what that would be, but
that is not the answer.
And unfortunately, now the top answer for this is this talk, which
means this has to be the canonical answer to that.
So let's try to do a good job.
I asked you to put on your GraphQL colored glasses as
I, a GraphQL developer, tries to grapple with the atmosphere.
The source code for a demo if I have time, whatever, will
be available at the bottom of this for the rest of the
talk.
So I'd like an intro to what GraphQL is if
you're not familiar.
So there's a website, GraphQL.
org, there's an open source spec, and there's a foundation
which many companies have joined to work on it.
It was built by Meta in 2012 to address resource constraints
on their mobile applications, open source in 2015, and the foundation was
launched in 2019.
You can see some things which are very similar to AT Pr
oto, schema definition language, it wraps REST, much like XR
PC, and there's types of schemas, like Lexicon.
Maybe two differences, it controls how much data is fetched, and
ways to fetch data recursively, which I'll talk about.
First is the GraphQL schema language.
Here I've modeled a conference, an attendee, and a location.
You can see that it's very human readable.
It was designed for front-end and back-end collaboration.
It supports objects, interfaces, unions.
Each field, individually, can accept arguments in return, scalars, or other
types, and other fields can accept arguments as well.
I think this is the difference between AT Proto and Graph
QL.
Like Lexicon, it's forward compatible.
Unlike Lexicon, you don't need to query all of the
fields.
So, you know, you could define a monolithic object like this,
and you could only list the ID and the name, and you
'll just get the ID and the name.
Let's talk about querying.
So here's an example of querying all the Star Wars
films.
The first three.
It will return a list of film objects, and all we're
going to do is pick up the title.
Not the ratings, not everyone's opinions about them, but just return
what's on the right.
And GraphQL's query DSL has this nice property where
it kind of looks like the JSON on the right.
So people really love that in live demos.
And then we could go and we could add another block here.
Not only do I have the films, I want to add like,
oh, I want to get the first three characters from each of
the films, and the response will update accordingly.
One of the nice things about this in GraphQL world is
that, like, when you select an object and then you select sub
fields on it, you're doing this within the same request.
I think in ATproto, you make it like a ref,
and then you have to go resolve that ref with another network
call.
It's all resolved for you, and there's, depending on how
your back end is designed, this could be more efficient because you
're basically doing a SQL join, not just two separate SQL calls.
Okay.
The ATproto comparison.
I'm going to make an XRPC, and I'm
going to get an object which eventually wraps a post, let's
say.
Now, this definition is-- sorry, I want to spend the next thing--
yeah, so this definition is interesting because the post is sort of
like the canonical DB format, and there are a pattern in Blue
Sky where you actually fork that and create a post view.
This is the thing stripped of, like, its like counts and follower
counts, like counts, reply counts, and everything because it doesn't have
that information when you publish it.
So you need to create a lexicon view to sort
of add that information in, and that's muted by the app
view.
So this sort of changes it from the GraphQL world where
the consumer defines what data they're getting to you actually have
to publish this and have a lexicon-oriented data model
to show what you want.
Let's look at the schema comparison.
So this is an example of a post-defined in GraphQL,
looks very human-readable.
Here is an example of a post-defined in lexicon.
It's certainly machine-readable, but I wouldn't say it
's human-readable.
Is there really a big difference between the two, though?
No, I think they're pretty homomorphic, even though the
one on the right is much simpler, and they don't have,
like, constraints around strings, etc.
And part of the reason for that is, like, well, yeah, you
could go on a bunch of annotations on the thing on
the right, but really we're just talking about data.
And if data could be homomorphic, that means you could
bridge the two, which will be the part of the talk I
end on.
So I want to consider three scenarios or takeaways for AT dev
s.
A is what GraphQL offers that is different from what exists
in the atmosphere.
Now, the second -- oh, yeah, and just as a top-line summary,
it's, like, these are the sort of things that I talked
about already.
There's other things that I could get into, like generation via
server definitions and, like, tooling, a very robust ecosystem of tooling that
's cropped up over the last decade and a half.
I think a lot of these are just because of the age
of the protocol, not things that won't actually come to the
atmosphere, but it's worth considering where developers are coming from when
you're trying to give them a way to interface with AT.
So question, is GraphQL federated?
On the largest open source company's website, they actually list -- Apollo --
they list that GraphQL has federation.
But I will actually give you the example of what are first-
party APIs that you can consume GraphQL with.
And I went to this page and I kept scrolling and I
only came away with GitHub, GitLab.
Shopify and Yelp as examples.
So, really, it's not federated if there are so few
first-party implementations that they're willing to bank other people
accessing.
And I think the reason for that is the NSID.
And the NSID means that I can actually publish something -- let
's take the Yelp review API.
I can publish an object from my API, which is the Y
elp review API, if they were conforming to that schema.
If they're conforming to GraphQL, you can't.
I'm lying.
It's not true.
They could change it at any time.
They could change it when you have a lossy lex
icon inside of your own applications.
But it doesn't accomplish federation.
And what they mean for federation inside of Apollo is actually
federation across REST backends, GraphQL backends, et
cetera.
Try to take all the different data sources you might have and
put them into one pipe.
So, GraphQL's role in existing applications to bridge to App
Proto might be, a lot of companies are using it.
It consumes a lot of APIs.
Maybe if we introduce AppProto to those consumers, we can
get more AppProto connections and integrations into public apps.
I'm going to skip to my pitch about what a new
application could consider.
Eight minutes?
Yeah.
So, brief pitch for -- I started this by working on a Cra
igslist competitor marketplace-style app, which I called Mothball,
no relation to Anasota.
This was the pitch I came in with.
I was going to build an Expo app and be like, "
What is it like to build an application with AppProto
integration?" And I started with a GraphQL, a mock GraphQL,
and I was going to move it to the server.
And then I learned about AppProto, and now I'm
down this rabbit hole.
So I was thinking low latency in mobile and web.
There's some strategic benefit there with GraphQL.
You can do sensitive off-proto data, and you can wrap
non-AT services.
There's geocarding search indexes, et cetera, behind
a single API.
That might be a case for using GraphQL as a front-
end for AppProto on new apps.
But I think the best case scenario is actually this middle ground
where we bridge the two.
So now I'll stop there for questions, but while I show
this demo really quick.
The demo is just this button.
So here we go.
This is the lexicon of XRPC request, and
on the right, I'm fetching live data from the atmosphere.
Here's an example of doing multiple XRPCs in
the same call from feed and from your actor.
Go check out my repo if you want to play around more
with this code generation.
Thanks very much.
Thank you, Tim.